>> Russell Targ is a physicist
and author who is a pioneer
in the development of the laser.
And he was co-founder of the
Stanford Research Institute's
investigation into
psychic abilities
in the 1970s and 1980s.
Russell is co-author
of "Mind-Reach--
Scientists look at Psychic
Abilities" and "The Mind Race--
Understanding and Using
Psychic Abilities."
Russell Targ and Dr.
Jane Katra co-authored
"The Heart of the Mind-- How to
Experience God Without Belief."
During the prophets conference
Mayaland, held in the Yucatan
this last June, Russell Targ
joined with shaman teachers
of ancient lineage to
explore and discuss
the clear similarities
found between remote viewing
and shamanic practices.
Let us give a warm
welcome to Russell Targ.
[APPLAUSE]
>>RUSSELL TARG: Thank you.
This is really a
homecoming for me.
I grew up on the Upper
West Side in New York City.
I went to Columbia
University where
I was a graduate student
just across the street.
So it's really a great privilege
to be in the Cathedral of Saint
John the Divine.
It's really a-- I'm always
writing about miracles.
And one of the things
that's a miracle
is how is it that a Jewish
kid from the Upper West Side
should be conducting the lesson
at Saint John the Divine.
[LAUGHTER]
They would say, it only happen
in a great city like New York,
as our beloved mayor
LaGuardia would always say.
But I'm very happy to be here.
But I was concerned
about speaking
on such spiritual matters
at Saint John the Divine.
So I live in California.
So I went to talk to my
teacher, Swami Beyondananda, who
has his ashram in Los Angeles,
in Beverly Hills actually.
And I said, Swami, what am I
going to say to these people?
I'm really not
qualified as a physicist
to be talking about spiritual
things in the great cathedral.
After all, I'm not a
minister of course.
And he took a look at
me and said, it's true.
You're actually not qualified.
But as I look at your aura, I
can see that in your past life
you were a rabbi.
Therefore, you can tell the
people you were preordained.
[LAUGHTER]
And what the Swami told
me is that everything
will be all right
if I can just keep
an opening at the top of my
head, the famous clown chakra,
so that you can all experience
with me in the field of farce
that we're going to
be talking about.
[LAUGHTER]
What I had promised to
describe in the program
that I'm talking about the
scientific and spiritual
implications of
psychic abilities.
So the first thing
I'm going to describe
is what psychic
abilities might be.
And then as a scientist, I will
show some evidence supporting
the idea that it's
actually true that we
do have psychic abilities.
And then the most important
part of the talk for me,
what's been interesting me
for the past many years,
is after you've discovered that
you have psychic abilities,
why should you care?
[LAUGHTER]
It's possible you can use
your psychic abilities
to do mundane things like
locating your car keys
and find parking places and
investing in the silver market.
But is there more to life
than the silver market?
And one of the things that
I'm going to talk about
is what the payoff
of becoming in touch
with your psychic abilities are.
This is a really new for me
because for the previous 20
years I was talking to
the government and NASA
and the CIA trying to convince
them the psychic abilities
are real.
And after having done that and
incorporated psychic abilities
into my life, it has become
much more interesting
to me to find out why
a person should bother.
Why a person should care that
you have psychic abilities.
Because after all, ESP is not
as good as vision or analysis
of the other things that work
excellently in our lives.
The most interesting
aspect of psychic abilities
is that they've been
known for millennia.
We haven't just discovered
ESP in the laboratory,
although we had a
lot of attention
during the '70s, '80s, and
'90s for the ESP research
we did at Stanford Research
Institute in California.
We had a program that was
supported by NASA, CIA, Defense
Intelligence Agency,
and all sorts
of other people that I
would have gone to prison
had I talked about before I
got the material released to me
from Freedom of Information.
So we became very skillful not
in understanding how ESP works.
But we did become
skillful in helping people
to become aware and acquainted
with the part of themselves
that's psychic.
So there is an
aspect of our selves
that has psychic ability
that can describe
and experience what's
going on in distant places.
We all have that ability
and we can learn to do it.
The ability derives
from the fact
that we live in a
non-local world.
Now, non-locality, as I've
discovered at this conference,
has become a almost
metaphysical prospect.
But actually,
non-locality as it's
described today
in modern physics
has a very specific meaning.
It doesn't have any metaphysical
consequences at all,
but in fact is something that
Einstein observed in 1935.
Einstein said, quantum
mechanics predicts
that if photons go off
in opposite directions
at the speed of light
and you polarize
the photon on the left,
then the photon on the right
will change or notice that.
That's a prediction
of quantum mechanics.
And Einstein said that
could not be right.
So he talked about
a spooky action
at a distance that strongly
violated special relativity.
Relativity says that if things
are travelling away from each
other at the speed of light,
they cannot be connected.
In fact, that's the
essence of something
that can't be connected.
Well, Einstein was correct that
quantum mechanics does indeed
predict this spooky
connection at a distance.
But he was incorrect in that
starting in 1969 physicists
were able to demonstrate
that these photons,
born together,
these twin photons
remained connected
across the laboratory
and across the world.
Experiments started at
University of California
at Berkeley showing these
photons are connected.
And experiments have now been
done in France and Zurich.
So that you can have a
source of photons in Zurich.
One goes to Basel, the
other one goes to Geneva.
A physicist in Basel
turns his polarizer.
The photon in
Geneva notices that.
This is what we call a
non-local connection.
It's a connection that
transcends space and time.
It says that things can be
separated from one another
by physical distances.
And even though
they're separated,
they still are a part of
the same wave function.
They still are connected
to one another.
This is not a
metaphysical proposition,
although it's been
understood for many years.
J.S. Bell, who was the
discoverer of non-locality
in this current
formulation, said
that no description
of modern physics
compatible with
the quantum theory
that we have today, no modern
physical theory can be local
anymore.
Now this is actually
a very old idea.
In the earliest teachings
of the Buddha written
in Prajnaparamita 500 years
before Christ-- prajna
is wisdom and paramita
is the highest wisdom.
So Prajnaparamita, which is
the written teachings of Buddha
that have come down to us.
There are many versions.
But Prajnaparamita is very
holographic in that every page
says the same thing
in different words.
But it's what it's saying is so
unintuitive you have hundreds
and hundreds of pages to
eventually internalize
what they're saying.
And the basic ideas in the
earliest Buddhist teachings
is that separation
is an illusion.
That our consciousness
transcends space and time.
Our awareness is
able to experience
what's in the region where
we are, what's in the region
beyond where we are
physically, and indeed
into the future and the past.
And it's the idea that
the earliest Hindus had.
The Hindus said, all is brahman.
Brahman is the totality of
consciousness and materiality
in the universe.
Atman is our own
consciousness, our own soul,
our own awareness.
And the fundamental teaching
of the Hindu philosophy
is atman month equals brahman.
That is, our awareness is
one with all that there is.
The Buddhist teaching says
that separation is an illusion
so that the-- as you know,
the basic teaching of Buddhism
is compassion.
And the reason that
you're compassionate
is not particularly
to help other people
and be a good Boy Scout.
The reason you're compassionate
is that there is only one of us
here in consciousness.
That is, we are not bodies.
We each have a body.
The bodies give us an
illusion of separateness
without a doubt.
Bodies have all different
kinds of shapes.
They're sources of pleasure,
sources of discomfort.
We have bodies but we are not
the body that you see here.
What we are is
the awareness that
is able to transcend
space and time.
We can enjoy this
expanded awareness.
And what we notice when you go
shopping is it there's only one
of us here.
When you go to the grocery
store or go to Radio Shack
and the salesperson does
not treat you exactly
like you think you'd
like to be treated,
that does happen sometimes
in New York I've noticed.
[LAUGHTER]
And what you notice is that
that person you're looking at
is in fact a
reflection of yourself.
That that encounter
is a holy encounter,
that you are seeing
yourself in the mirror
of the hard working
person that's struggling
to understand what you want.
So it's the idea that our ego
is a source of the separateness
and that we get very
attached to what
we're wearing, how our hair is
combed, who we think we are.
We all carry little
cards with us.
And what these cards actually
are, are story cards.
They're not business cards.
It's a story of who
we think we are today.
I look at my story
card, and it says today
and I'm a physicist here talking
at Saint John the Divine.
Tomorrow I may have a
totally different story.
And we get very attached
to these stories.
But what we discover
as we get increasingly
in touch with the
psychic part of ourselves
and that awareness can expand
through space and time,
these stories surprisingly
become less interesting.
What the spiritual
teachers tell us
is that we have the opportunity
for expanded awareness
to describe different modes
being, different ways of being
in the world.
And we have a choice as to
how we're going to do that.
In psychic abilities,
for example,
you have the opportunity
to inflow information
from a distant place.
This is called remote viewing,
where you can stand here
and psychically or
clairvoyantly experience
what's going on a
different distant place.
Similarly, you can outflow
your healing intention
to heal people who are sick or
suffering in a distant place.
Between the inflow in the
outflow is a quiet place
that you discover when you learn
to quiet the ongoing chatter.
And in that quiet place,
you have an opportunity
to reside in a loving space
that the mystics talk about
for millennia.
That quiet place has
many different names.
The Buddhists talk
about residing in love.
You have an opportunity
to experience
the oceanic
connection to all that
is, to all the forms
of consciousness
that there is in the world.
And you can experience
that directly
in this loving, quiet state.
And have an opportunity to be
out of time and out of space
and discover that you have
within you the love that you're
looking for.
Now this experience can be found
in a variety of different ways.
It could be found
through meditation,
which is the traditional
Hindu or Buddhist way.
It can be found through
centering prayer.
I had the privilege of sitting
with Thomas Keating, who
is a great Catholic mystic
who teaches centering prayer.
You can choose a
word or a phrase
or an idea to focus your
mind upon and achieve
the same quietness that
the Buddhists talk about.
There's also drug experiences
that we heard about yesterday.
And there are many different
paths you can follow.
I've had an opportunity
to follow many of those.
I had the privilege of sitting
with Ram Dass a number of years
ago just after he was
recovering from his stroke.
And one of the things--
he had a meeting
with people on the West Coast
who think about these things
and teach.
And he said, it's very important
that those of you who finally
cracked open your
analytical mind
and had an experience of God
or a transcendent experience,
if you've had that
experience through drugs,
it's a lie to pretend that
you had the experience
from a lifetime of meditation.
So one of the
things that he said
is that it's time
the teachers who've
had the benefit of a variety
of different mind opening
chemicals, it's time
to tell the truth
and describe that these
chemicals can give you
an experience of
quieting your mind,
residing in a loving state,
discovering that there is more
to you than is on
your business card
and that the awareness you have
transcends your physical body.
So there are many paths
to this awareness.
And this has been taught
by mystics throughout ages.
That is, all the mystics
are teaching the same thing.
The great surprise as
I became interested
in this, that is the
teaching of oneness
is the universal
teaching-- a mystical
is a person who doesn't
ask you to believe a thing.
That's very important.
There's the mystic Sufis.
So you have the direct
experience of God
that's available.
The Kabbalistic Jews say that
if you will study the Kabbalah
you can go directly to Ein
Sof and be one with God.
In the Christian tradition,
the Gnostic Christians
said that we are still receiving
the direct transmission
of Jesus.
Jesus' physical body is
gone, but we, 100 years
after the death of
Christ, do not need
bishops or priests or deacons.
Jesus is still
transmitting to us
and we are still experiencing
the transmission.
So it's quite interesting
that the mystic Christians
or like Gnostics
or the Kabbalistic
Jews or the Buddhists or
the Hindus, they all agree.
There's no disagreement
about the fact
that it's possible
to quiet your mind,
reside in love as a
place to live your life.
This is not about
boyfriends and girlfriends.
It's actually beyond
relationships.
I know it's hard to believe.
But it's possible to reside in
a loving space through your day.
And after you've discovered
that the love you're looking for
is within you, it
is quite likely
going to change your life.
In fact, I had this experience.
I was an aerospace engineer.
And I had done that for many
years and I was well paid
and what I was doing
was quite interesting.
And as I went through
this process putting
lasers on spacecraft
simply became boring.
Became absurd.
It no longer seemed
like an appropriate way
to spend my time since I had the
feeling that other people could
do that.
And there are fewer
people who were
going to stand up
and say that you have
the love within you that
you're looking for in a way
to try and encourage
people to look inside
through some kind of procedure,
whether it's meditation
or prayer or some other
approach to discover
that what all of the
mystics have been saying
is something that's
available to us today.
Now this experience
of oceanic connection,
the opportunity to reside
in a kind of loving syrup,
is an idea this common
to all traditions.
It could even be the
equivalent to saying,
we are experiencing love
or we are experiencing God.
In my upbringing as
a Jewish physicist,
I always would hear, in
the Christian theology
on Sunday morning they
would say, God is love.
And nobody ever
unpacked that for me.
I thought that's something
that ministers say just
to annoy the non-believers.
[LAUGHTER]
So it's quite interesting
is that what you have is
a different spiritual writings.
You have the Koran
and the New Testament
and the Old Testament
and the Bhagavad Gita
and the writings of Buddha.
They are all trying
to remind you
that you are already connected
to a kind of psychic internet.
You have that
connection within you.
We all have this ability
to reside in love.
But each of the different
organized religion
has different software
available to make
you aware of the
connection between yourself
and the psychic internet that
you're already connected to.
The thing that's very amazing is
that all the religious strife,
all the holy wars,
are over software.
It's not over religious
differences at all.
It's over simply
what process are
you going to use
to awaken yourself,
to wake up to the fact that you
have this connection already
hardwired in you.
The Harvard philosopher
says that God
is a testable
hypothesis, that we're
hardwired for God, that we have
an innate desire and capability
to have this
religious experience.
Herbert Benson is the one who
talked about the relaxation
response.
Relaxation response is Harvard
code for quieting your mind
and having a
transcendent experience.
God and Harvard have always
had a hard time together.
[LAUGHTER]
So they talk about relaxation
response, but in recent years
Herbert Benson is
talking about the fact
that we are hardwired for God.
We have an innate desire
to have this experience.
And the experience is something
that is part of a path.
It shows up.
The Hindu teacher Patanjali,
who was 100 years after Buddha--
Patanjali was a great teacher
and grammarian and logician.
This is 400 years before Christ.
Patanjali is leading us in
his book "How to Know God."
You can tell that he's a
great teacher because his book
written 2,400 years ago is still
available at Barnes & Noble's.
That's one of the
great enduring classic.
And Patanjali is
principally telling us
how to quiet our minds
to experience God.
And he says, along
the way you will
have certain
interesting experiences.
You will discover that you
can look into the distance,
you can look into the future,
you can heal the sick,
you can diagnose illnesses.
And these abilities
will come to you.
And he describes
in great detail how
you are able to do that and
the things that interfere
with your ability to do that.
He talks about the
fact that your memory
and your imagination and your
analysis and your guessing
interfere with your
innate capacity
to experience what's
hidden from view.
He says, but it's very
important to notice
that as these abilities
begin to appear,
the good news is that you are
learning to quiet your mind.
You're learning to stop and
stifle the ongoing chatter.
However, it's very
important not to get
attached to this ability.
These abilities are
just more phenomena.
And what Patanjali
is trying to do
is lead us to an experience
of transcendence.
He's trying to lead
us to experience
outside of ourselves.
Now many people get attached
to the idea, my goodness,
I can find parking places.
I've learned to quiet my
mind and do a procedure that
allows me to use my psychic
ability to forecast the stock
market.
Now one of the interesting
things that you've probably
heard is that it's like as if
God won't let you use your ESP
to enrich yourself.
It's not true.
In the '80s, I did a long
series of experiments
forecasting silver
commodity futures
and was extremely successful.
I was working with an
enthusiastic investor.
And we, not to dwell on it, we
made nine significant forecast
where the silver market would
go up a little or up a lot
of or down a little
or down a lot.
And all nine of our
forecasts were correct.
And that supported
our group for a year.
So it's definitely possible
to use your ability
to interact with the material
plane, even in the future.
And as I moved
along in my path, I
wrote another book recently
called "Miracles of Mind."
And my co-author is a
healer, Jane Kantra.
And our publisher
said, if you're
going to tell people
how to develop
their psychic
abilities, you really
ought to demonstrate that
ordinary people can do that.
So Jane and I, together with two
other people who monitored us,
we went out to recapitulate the
silver forecasting experiment.
And just sitting on the
floor in our living room
across the coffee table
week after week, we
made 12 forecasts for the
silver commodity future
and 11 out of 12 were correct.
So shows that even authors
and teachers and scientists
can learn to get in touch
with psychic abilities
with surprising accuracy
and reliability.
And we describe how to do that.
The idea of pre-cognition is
one of the great mysteries.
I will try only to tell you
true things today, the things
that I've published
in the proceeding
of the Electrical
Engineering Society
or in "Nature" journal or the
American Academy of Sciences.
All of the miracles-- see, when
we publish scientific findings
what you do is you take
something that's basically
a miracle and then
you wrap it up
with the formalisms
and the introductions
and the references that make it
look like a scientific paper.
But it's basically
a miracle wrapped up
in the academic apparatus
to make it look as though we
understand what we're doing.
[LAUGHTER]
But it's important to have
your findings peer reviewed
and published in a
bona fide journal
so that if you say, why should
I believe this material you're
telling me I can say,
well, we've published it
and people have replicated
what we have found.
They replicated in laboratories
all over the world.
We don't entirely
understand how it works.
And if we have
time at the end, I
can tell you how
this might work.
What kind of reproach
might we make
between what we see in the
laboratory and the nature
of the physical
universe that allows
us to transcend space and time?
But the fact that we
can expand our awareness
and have these
experiences has now
been demonstrated very
reliably for more than 30 years
after our-- we didn't invent
psychic abilities, obviously,
at Stanford Research Institute.
But we found a particular
way of teaching people
how to get in touch with the
part of themself that's psychic
so that they can have these
experiences of expanded
awareness and incorporate
them into their lives.
Now, the teachers,
historically--
the mystic teachers were
not interested in publishing
their findings in the
Engineering Society
or even forecasting
silver futures.
So there's a difference between
different kinds of things
that I could tell you about.
Quieting your mind
certainly will help
you lower your blood pressure.
If you can learn to
go through your day
and give up some
of your judgment
and fear and attachment--
in New York judgment
is particularly hard
to give up I noticed.
Judgment is very
interesting in that
as you discover-- because
we're very good analysts.
All of us here a
very good analysts.
We can tell with great
precision everything
that's the matter with the
person sitting next to us.
And we've gotten very
skillful at that.
But it doesn't serve us.
It's like a trick.
What you discover is that
when you give up judgment,
not only are you a more pleasant
person, but you feel better.
Because the person you're
judging is, in fact, yourself.
You're comparing,
how am I compared
with this person and that
person and the other person?
So giving up judgment is a
surprising almost shocking way
of giving up your own suffering.
And after a while, you find
that your snappy friends
who have a caustic,
correct, and astute word
to say about everybody
else, those friends
become very uninteresting
because they cause us pain.
What we discover after a
while is that judgment,
although is very
entertaining, actually causes
pain for the person
who's doing the judging.
And that really was a very
surprising thing for me
to discover, that because
there is only one of us
here in consciousness
whatever judging we do
causes pain do our own selves.
It's like having
resentment about somebody
and carrying that
resentment around with you.
It's equivalent to saying,
that person is really
a no good person
and every day I'm
going to drink a little
poison to show him
what a lousy person he is.
And many people do that
throughout their whole lives.
So the idea of incorporating
some measure of forgiveness
into your life is not
to say that you forget
what somebody has done to you.
But what you want to do
is get that person out
of your backpack so you
don't have to carry them
around every day with you.
It feels amazing to lighten up
and give up the burden of who
you've been carrying around.
Now these ideas
are very valuable.
They've been part of the
perennial philosophy taught
for years.
And I think of them in
the general category
of self-improvement.
And there's nothing the
matter with self-improvement.
But that's not what I'm
talking about today.
The difference between
self-improvement
and self-realization.
In self-realization
you, in addition
to becoming aware of the
desirability of forgiveness
and a degree of surrendering
our judgments-- in addition
to that self-realization
allows you
to go through your day residing
in a loving space surrounded
with your own
awareness that you have
within you the love
that you're traveling
around the city looking for.
And that's a big surprise.
The payoff for
expanded awareness
or quieting your mind
or meditation or drugs
or centering prayer,
the payoff for that
is not a cool
experience, but rather
is to discover who you
are, to get in touch
with the idea of who you
are in Christian terms
as a child of God, in the
more mystical terms as one
with the universe.
Because Eisenstein
was often asked
whether he believed in God.
And what he said
is that he believes
in the god of Spinoza,
which is the organizing
principle of the universe.
So we are one with all
that there is available.
And this is not a
metaphysical principle
because our evidence shows
that when you quiet your mind
you have the opportunity to
be out of time, out of space,
and reside in love.
And just as a way of
manifesting that, say
is this a metaphysical
principle?
Is this a Sunday
school class or can
we really expand our awareness?
What we have found is
that in the laboratory
it is surprisingly easy to
show people how to do this.
So if we can dim
the lights, I'll
show you a little bit
about what we were up to
at Stanford Research Institute.
The way the story
got started is that I
had a long time in
psychic abilities.
At the same time I was a physics
student here at Columbia,
I was also doing
magic on the stage.
And what I discovered in
doing magic on the stage
and doing mental magic
is that oftentimes I
would have people put
questions in a jar
and then I would pretend
to read their mind,
answer their questions.
And of course, I had
already read the questions.
What do you think?
So I would hold a piece
of paper up my forehead
and say, there's a
woman in the audience
and she's lost her dog.
And I knew that
because I'd already
read that there's a woman in
the audience who'd lost her dog.
But with the light
shining in my eyes,
I could go into this
wonderful hypnogogic state
and see her house.
And I could say-- I
would say first of all,
is there a woman here
who has lost her dog?
And she'd say, oh, yes.
Yes.
Isn't that amazing?
And I would say,
well, I see your house
and it's got a white
fence and a tree in front
and you've got a patchwork
quilt on your bed.
And that was real magic.
Because that wasn't
on a piece of paper.
And what I discovered, much
to my 20-year-old amazement,
is that I could
supplement my trickery
by genuine psychic ability.
Now you've got to
be aware that there
are plenty of psychics
out on the street who
supplement their ESP by whatever
trickery they can get away
with.
[LAUGHTER]
So that works both ways.
But as a young magician,
as a young science student,
I thought it was more
interesting to learn
about these psychic ability than
to just go on deceiving people.
So I became in contact
with J.B. Rhine
at Duke University who was
a pioneer in parapsychology.
And started
discovering for myself
ways to teach people to get
in touch with the psychic part
of themselves.
So I formed together with
my colleague Hal Puthoff,
another layer physicist.
Coincidence that
two laser physicists
were able to start a ESP program
at Stanford Research Institute.
But we felt that
during the Cold War
psychic abilities might
actually be useful.
And of course the CIA is not
anybody's favorite customer.
But as scientists, we
felt that intelligence
is much to be
preferred to ignorance.
So we went to the
CIA and said, we
think we have the
ability to describe
distant places in a way
that would be useful to you.
And the CIA gave us some
demonstration of ability tasks
to do.
And that was successful and
we then had a 20 year research
activity.
One of the many
things that-- evidence
we can offer for the existence
of psychic abilities--
if any of you have ever tried to
get money from the government,
you can appreciate we had
an ESP program spending
a couple of million a
year that was renewed year
after year for 20 years
for doing psychic research.
So I would have to ask you to
consider that it must be pretty
likely that we were
doing something
useful for our sponsor
or they wouldn't
keep renewing our program
year after year for 20 years.
One of the very psychic people
we worked with a policeman
named Pat Price.
Pat had heard of
our work and he said
that he had been using
psychic abilities for years
to catch criminals.
As he would sit
in the dispatch--
he was the police
commissioner of Burbank.
And he would sit in
his office and would
hear of a crime being committed
and would then send out
a squad car in his
city to pick up
a man who he sensed
as a frightened man
at a particular
street intersection.
And he came to us and with a
scrapbook full of testimonials
to his psychic prowess showing
how he had used his ESP
to catch criminals.
So one of the picture--
I have six pictures
I'm going to show you from
our many years of work
to give you an idea of
what we had been up to.
In this case, all
of these experiments
are a kind of psychic
hide and go seek.
I had really found a
very entertaining way
to employ myself for
this period of time.
[LAUGHTER]
The way this works is that I
would sit in the laboratory,
usually in an electrically
shielded room,
in Menlo Park, California.
I would be sitting there
with the psychic du
jour, whoever it was.
Whether it's a policemen or
a army officer or a cabinet
level official from
the government.
I would be sitting with this
person in the laboratory.
And one or more
other people would
go and hide themselves someplace
in the San Francisco Bay Area.
And I wouldn't know
where they had gone
or even where they
might have gone.
And one thing I can
tell you off to the side
is that both the psychic and
the interviewer in this case
don't want to know anything
about the psychic answer.
If you ever go to a
psychic-- if you ever
go to Madame
Catherine on Broadway
to find out who you're going
to marry and you sit down,
if she's a genuine
psychic she'll say,
don't tell me a thing.
Let me tell you
about who you are.
And as you recognize the
truth of what I'm saying,
I will drift into your future.
If she says, well, I'd like to
know your name, your birthdate,
and where you were born, pack
up and go someplace else.
Because a true psychic
doesn't want to know anything.
That's one of the things
that we do understand.
Is that anything
you tell a psychic
by way of analytical information
will cloud up and make dirty
her mental slate.
What she wants to do is sit
down with you, close her eyes,
and experience the
images that come.
So if you tell her your
name is Mary Greenberg
and you live in
Brooklyn, she already
has a whole picture of
you and your grandmother
and your borscht and
the synagogue you go to.
And all of that
tremendously interferes
with her ability to do what
you're asking her to do.
So it's not as though somebody's
going to whisper in my ear,
we're going to be in
northern California.
I don't want to
know where they're
going to go because everything
you tell me about the target
interferes with my ability
to help the psychic describe
the target.
So in this case I'm
sitting with the policemen.
And he would polish his
glasses and sit back
and close his eyes.
And what he said is that I see a
rectangular pool here 68 by 75,
said he.
And the round pool,
100 feet in diameter.
And then there's this
little block house he drew.
He said, that's what I get.
Now as we were
taken, an hour later,
to the target where
they had actually gone,
it turned out that our
laboratory director and one
of the CIA visitors-- we had
a constant parade of visitors
to see how we could
possibly be cheating.
So in this case, the CIA
guy chose the target.
He said, let's drive it
I'll tell you where to stop.
And they stopped at a
swimming pool complex
called Rinconada Pool about
five miles from SRI, Stanford
Research Institute.
And the pool was really
110 feet in diameter
and this pool was,
I think, 75 by 100.
So sitting in Menlo
Park five miles away,
the policeman was able
to describe the target
with accuracy of
greater than 90%.
That's good for another year's
renewal of the contract.
[LAUGHTER]
But Price went on
to say, I know what
this is from my experience.
This is a water
purification plant
as we were still sitting back in
the electrically shielded room.
And he said, I see these
two big water tanks.
That's how I know it's a
water purification plant.
And I should say, we're
in a shielded room
because we wanted to make sure
that no confederate-- this is
from the days we were
working with Uri Geller.
We wanted to make sure
that no confederate would
send a radio signal in to inform
the psychic covertly of what
the target was.
What we discovered
is the psychics
liked being the shielded room.
So we continued to work
there because it turned out
to be a good environment.
But Price saw these
two big water tanks.
And when we got
to Rinconada Park
there were, in fact,
no water tanks at all.
It was a lovely public park with
green grass and two swimming
pools.
So my story had been
for about a decade
that Price is a
prodigious psychic who
was able to describe this
thing with great accuracy.
However, his analytical mind
created these water tanks out
of his memory and imagination.
So we call that
analytic overlay.
Ingo Swann was a great psychic
in New York and an artist
who taught us how to
do remote viewing.
Swann talked about the
problems of analytical overlay
that interfere with our
ability to clean our slate,
look for a psychic surprises.
So we said that Price just
made up these water tanks.
10 years later we
celebrated the centenary
of the city of Palo Alto.
And I was sent a picture
book of what the city looked
like 50 and 100 years ago.
And to our great surprise,
50 years ago Rinconada Park
was a water purification
plant, just as Price described.
And the tallest thing in the
city of Palo Alto at that time
were the two water tanks that
Price saw in the park right
where he had drawn them.
So what's a poor physicist
to make out of that?
What it appears is that
Price followed our travelers
to their hiding place
in Rinconada Park,
described what was
there, and then
moved back along the
timeline 50 years
to describe the most imposing
and interesting thing
at the site.
One of things that
Pat Price did for us
was a spectacular demonstration
of ability for the CIA.
When we talked to the courageous
director of intelligence
at CIA, he said you guys
are wasting your time
describing churches and
swimming pools in Palo Alto.
We have places that
really need a description.
So he sent us a CIA physicist
with geographical coordinates
of latitude and longitude
with instructions
to describe what was at
that latitude and longitude.
And Price said that
he was psychically
lying on a building
at those coordinates.
And as he lay
there, a giant crane
was rolling back and forth
over his body on the building.
A big Gantry crane.
And he said, this crane
is so big I've never
seen anything like it.
It has wheels on both
sides of the building.
And Price drew this crane
here, which I hope you can see.
It has eight wheels.
Four on one side, four
on the other side.
And we gave that to the CIA
operative who was with us
and said, does this look
anything like your target site?
And he said, well, I
think you're probably
looking at the right
place because this
was a satellite photograph of
the crane that was at the site.
And at the top here we show
way an airbrushed version
of the satellite
photograph containing
the crane and the building.
And they said that your
drawing is so accurate
that we have to assume you're
looking at the right building--
at the right place.
But of course, we
already knew that.
What we'd like you to do
now is describe what's
going on inside the building.
And Price went on to
describe how the Soviets were
fabricating a 60
foot steel sphere,
which they were welding together
out of orange peel slices
to make the 60 foot chamber.
And the CIA were
able to conclude
from that that what they
were building at this weapons
factory 10,000 miles away in
Semipalatinsk what they were
building was a particle
beam weapon for the purpose
of shooting down
the satellites that
were taking these pictures.
[LAUGHTER]
And three years later,
this big steel sphere
was in fact rolled
out of the building.
And we were able to verify,
with great precision,
that the 60 foot sphere
that Price described
under construction was,
in fact, exactly what was
being built at that building.
Now we don't have to
send you to prison
for seeing these secret
slides because from Freedom
of Information I was
able get these released.
It was 18 month effort with
two congressman, a senator,
and two lawyers.
[LAUGHTER]
And eventually we-- with a
very entertaining prospect,
I became eager to go to court.
I said, let's go to court and
you explain to the country
why national
security won't allow
you to reveal your ESP work.
And they said, it's
easier just to release it.
So this was-- the whole
story of our CIA support
was released to me.
And in our book,
"Miracles of Mind,"
we describe how we became
involved with the CIA
and what we did for
them during that period.
Now as part of this
activity, we were
interested in seeing
if it's harder
to describe things that
are far away than things
that are nearby.
So as part of this research,
my colleague Hal Puthoff
traveled through Central
America and South America.
And each day Pat Price would
describe where Hal was hiding.
He talked about
mountains and seaports
and churches and volcanoes.
All kinds of
different things like
you would expect to find in
the South American seacoast.
And then, of course,
we got no feedback
because he was in
South America and we
didn't learn anything until
weeks later when he returned.
But one day during this
period, Price did not show up.
And I was in my little
shielded chamber
and I said on the
tape recording,
this is a remote
viewing experiment
with Russell Tag and Pat Price.
But Price didn't come.
So in the spirit that the
show must go on, I said,
I'll do it myself.
[LAUGHTER]
And I had never done
anything like this,
though I had led people
in psychic experiments.
My vision is very poor as
you've probably caught on to,
so I don't drive.
So I became a
psychic travel agent.
I would sit-- I was
always the stay at home.
These are like twin experiments
and I was always the stay
at home twin in the laboratory
helping somebody else
to describe what was going
on at a distant place.
But in this occasion, I
just sat down and I said,
I see something that
looks like an island.
And it looks to me like
a runway with ocean
at the end the island.
I see sand and
grass on the right.
And I see a hangar
building on the left.
And that's what I see.
And I wrote my name on it
and said, Price isn't here.
Do the best we can.
Well, Hal Puthoff came back.
And he had taken a side
trip that day to San Andreas
off the coast of Colombia.
And as I was drawing my airport,
he was at an island airport
off the coast of Colombia.
And you see that
airport building
on the left and the grass
and the sand on the right.
So the very good-- I'm
not showing you this
to demonstrate my psychic
prowess particularly.
But what it shows is
that even a scientist
can be psychic if a necessity
level is high enough.
[LAUGHTER]
So somebody with a
training in atomic physics
can sit down and do
a remote viewing,
you should consider
that an inspiration
that you should go home and
see if you can incorporate this
into your own lives.
In the course of our work,
we did remote viewings
with all sorts of people.
Scientists,
government officials,
right up to the
Undersecretary of Defense.
And one of the many
people we worked with
was a Army intelligence
officer, Joe McMoneagle.
And Joe had had psychic
experiences in his life,
but he'd never done
remote viewing.
And he came to SRI
and I had a chance
to show him how to
do remote viewing.
And it turned out to be the
most prodigious remote viewer
that we've had in
our laboratory.
So I'm always happy to say,
I showed Joe how to do this.
Because my wife was the
sister of Bobby Fischer,
the great chess player.
World chess champion.
And of course, she taught
Bobby how to play chess.
[LAUGHTER]
So she said, there he is.
Champion of the world and
I taught him how to play.
Doesn't mean I taught
him everything he knows.
I did have the
privilege of showing Joe
how to do remote
viewing, and he then
went flying away for
the next many years.
So as we sat in our laboratory,
Joe drew a number of pictures
and said basically,
I see this thing
of a building in two parts.
There's a horizontal
part and a vertical part.
And there seems to be a
little fountain in front.
And by and by, our
travelers, which
was the colonel in charge
of his intelligence unit
together with one
of the SRI people,
came back from the
Stanford Art Museum.
And you can see the strong
resemblance between what
Joe drew in his
very first effort
and the remote viewing site
were the people were located.
I'm showing you two
more slides that are
interesting because it's
in evidence that people
learn to get better
at psychic abilities.
They learn to perfect
this intellectual task.
Psychic abilities is not
a metaphysical activity.
It's a intellectual activity.
And you can learn to quiet the
mental noise that interferes
with psychic abilities.
You can learn to quiet down
the imagination and memory
and analysis and guessing so
that you can not necessarily
become more psychic, but we do
know how to quiet the noise.
So an engineer talks about
the signal to noise ratio
and what we become very good
at is quieting the noise.
So 10 years later,
Joe McMoneagle
is doing experiments with
another physicist, Ed May.
I had left the program.
But we wanted to see 10 years
later how was Joe doing.
So each year the CIA would
come and visit us just
to make sure ESP still exists.
[LAUGHTER]
So in this case, a new CIA
operative came and said,
I'm going to drive for
an hour and be someplace
and I haven't decided
yet where I'm going.
And then an hour after that,
I'll go somewhere else.
And I'd like you to
describe both places.
And then I'll come back.
Well, first picture that Joe
drew, we show at the bottom
here, is a kind of
architectural sketch.
And he said, I think the guy
is at this six story t-shaped
building covered with glass.
And I see a row of trees here.
And it looks like some kind of
industrial complex, laboratory,
R&D facility.
But the guy is hiding
at this building.
And indeed he is hiding at
the administration building
of Lawrence Livermore, which
is our very own atomic bomb
laboratory in California about
100 miles east of Stanford
Research Institute.
And you can see that Joe,
who's a fine artist also,
was able to make this three
dimensional projective
sketch of a t-shaped
six story building.
And that's just what
we had at the site.
Last slide I'll show you is the
next place the CIA person went,
which is the Altamont
Windmill Farm in the foothills
of the Sierras.
And you have all these
attractive windmills
spinning on a hilltop.
Joe said that he senses an
electrical grid of some sort
and there's an aura that
you can't see around
the top of all these
poles in the hills.
And he said, there's something
electrical about this place.
And he made this sketch.
Now in the work that J.B.
Rhine had done for many years
at Duke University he had
people guessing cards.
Circle, square, stars,
cross, and wavy lines.
And although some people
were very, very good
at that over a period
of many, many months,
inevitably they declined.
So the decline effect became
one of the most robust features
of psychic ability.
It's as though Rhine had
discovered a way to extinguish
ESP in the laboratory.
And that's, of course, not
all what he intended to do,
but he basically bored
people into a decline--
[LAUGHTER]
--by giving them targets.
And you all know why this
experiment didn't work.
It didn't work because each
day you would sit down you
would know in advance
that when you quiet
your mind somebody's going
to be psychically sending you
a square, a circle, a
wavy line, and so forth.
So your mental noise,
your mental slate,
is dirty at the very start.
If psychic functioning
in order to exist
requires that you
be able to read
the serial number of a
dollar bill in my wallet,
then there isn't any ESP.
Because that's a task
as analytical in nature.
Your mind is filled
with numbers.
And you have an extremely
hard time reading numbers.
On the other hand, it is
much easier and in fact
possible if I tell you that I'm
thinking of a place anywhere
on the planet out of an
infinitude of possible places
that you've never seen,
that task is easy to do.
So a paradox is
that out of-- it's
easier to describe, one, out
of infinitely many places
in the planet that you
haven't seen than it is
to guess a number from 1 to 10.
And that's the
slides we have here.
Can we have the
lights up, please?
That's part one.
And that pertains to the
inflow of psychic information.
That's about remote viewing,
it's about the psychic ability
that all of us have and can
incorporate into our lives.
The other thing that's
very interesting
is that the outflow of
healing intention we have.
We have the ability
to quiet our minds
and affect the physiology of
people at a distant location.
And in fact, in
recent years, there
have been more and
more papers published
about the work of healers
throughout the country,
throughout the United States,
being able to help people
with heart disease and AIDS.
Recently a paper was published
in the "Western Medical
Journal" describing a
series of experiments
that were done at California
Pacific Medical Center.
In this case, the experimenter
was my daughter, Elisabeth
Targ, who is a psychiatrist.
So there's a second
generation troublemaker.
And what she was
interested in seeing
is whether healers of various
types throughout the country
could help her AIDS patients.
So this was an
experiment with 60 men
who were very sick at California
Pacific Medical Center.
She divided them into two
groups randomly matched
for age and degree of illness.
And then had a number of
different experienced healers
throughout the country.
These would be
Catholic prayer groups,
American Indian healers, Reiki
healers, followers of Barbara
Brennan who are energy healers.
There's all kinds of
different healers.
She had 20 healers
in this group.
And each person who was sick
had 10 healers assigned to him.
So each sick man in
the pray for group
had 10 people praying for them.
The end of 10 weeks,
what she found
was that people in
the pray for group
had much better health,
statistically significantly
fewer opportunistic illnesses,
fewer trips to the hospital,
fewer days in the hospital, and
much better robust self-esteem
and feeling about themselves.
So it was crystal
clear that the people
who are being prayed
for significantly
benefited from the prayers
of these distant people
all over the country.
That's not to say that their
AIDS were cured by any means.
But in a double blind balanced
study-- of course everybody,
all the patients
wished that they
were in the prayed for group.
But only half of
them actually were.
But the finding was very strong
so that it was immediately
published in a mainstream
medical journal.
And the moral of the story is
that even if you don't believe
in prayer and somebody
offers to pray for you,
you should accept the prayers.
And this work has
now been replicated
in two other laboratories
where the physicians were heart
doctors and had people
around the country praying
for their cardiac patients.
And these papers have now
been published in the "Annals
of Internal Medicine."
So it's almost a
paranormal occurrence.
Doctors are generally the
last to catch on, even
after the physicists.
[LAUGHTER]
But even the
medical community is
becoming cognizant of the
idea that distant prayer,
distant mental
influence, actually
improves the medical
care of their patient.
So one of the things
that this says
to us is the old idea
of bedside manner
is really critically important.
What we're showing
here is that the mind
to mind connection
between a healer, which
is any person with
healing intent,
directly affects the
physiology of the person he's
attending to.
So if your doctor
simply treats you
as a undressed illness
sitting on a table,
you are not getting the medical
care that could cure you.
And I'm not saying that
that's unfriendly or cold or
impersonal.
What I'm saying is that if
your doctor is treating you
as a sick body
sitting on the table,
you are not getting
the healing that's
capable from the interaction
between the person with healing
intent and yourself.
Bedside manner is not a nicety.
It's not a politeness that
makes for good feelings
between a doctor and a patient.
Bedside manner is
a critical part
of what allows
you to get better.
And if your doctor is
treating you with a sick body,
you're not getting
good medical care.
It's crystal clear.
Now what we find
is that people have
an idea that there is
a conflict of some kind
between the spirituality
and the metaphysical things
that we're talking
about and science.
There's somehow an idea as
you read the news magazines.
There is an ongoing discussion
of science versus religion.
And in fact, that's a
dichotomy that doesn't exist.
If you talk about
science and spirituality,
spirituality is just
another aspect of life
that we can incorporate into
our day to day activities.
And there's no conflict with
the scientific approach at all.
As we discussed in
the panel last night,
entering upon a
spiritual life is
like a laboratory experiment.
The Buddhists described
2,500 years ago
that certainly experiences
of peace and transcendence
and expanded awareness
and one with God
and the ability
to reside in love,
those experiences
are available to you.
You don't have to
believe a thing.
If you will find a
way or a practice
or a prayer or a meditation
to quiet your mind
and you follow
that practice, you
will discover that these
experiences are available.
So it's very much
like what I was
doing 40 years ago at Columbia.
It's a lab report.
You can find any one of a
number of different products
that talk about centering
prayer or meditation,
follow that practice, and
then at the end of six weeks
write down what
you've experienced.
You'll discover
that you can start
on a path of expanding your
awareness in the direction
of self-realization,
which is to say
discovering who you might be.
So there's no conflict there.
Nothing I've said today is an
invitation to believe a thing.
This is a direct
experience that's available
and there is no conflict at all.
But you do have to take
some steps to find a way
to quiet your mind.
The last actual
job that I held I
was working for the second
richest man in the world.
And he's probably now down
to his bottom $20 billion
with the collapse of
the internet market.
But he came one day and
talked to us and said,
I have a vision.
This is the second
richest man in the world.
He has a vision.
He could do anything
in the world.
And what his vision
is, is that you
should have a large
television screen on the wall
of your living room.
And on the screen,
you have access
to the internet and
the worldwide web.
You can read your email.
You can watch television.
And you can play video
games all at the same time
without ever leaving your couch.
So his vision of the world is
a world in which you need never
have another quiet moment.
[LAUGHTER]
And as you watch
television, you see
that CNN and all the networks
and all the cable companies
have exactly the same
prescription in mind for you.
Because if you're sitting home
quietly in love experiencing
God, nobody's making any money.
[LAUGHTER]
But the experience is available.
And it's an opportunity that you
can incorporate into your life.
And it's not difficult to do.
You just have to decide that
it's an important part of what
you want to experience.
And the steps that are
often talked about.
There are four steps that
could be described as going
on that particular path.
The really tough
one is to find a way
to quiet your mind so that
you wake up each morning
in gratitude rather than fear.
And that's an opportunity
to make a choice.
Every morning you wake
up, you open your eyes.
And I'm very familiar--
the aerospace engineer.
You open your eyes in fear.
Say, how am I gonna
pay my mortgage?
My kid's college tuition?
I've got this crazy job.
Or I don't have enough
money to finish the project.
And I certainly don't
have enough time.
And it's technically
probably impossible.
So I'd wake up immediately
running the tape filled
with all the things that
I'm concerned about,
frightened about.
And I'm not feeling
too good either.
There's just a multitude
of different things
that I can experience.
That's one opportunity.
Very easy, familiar opportunity.
Or you can wake up your mind
and say, what do you know?
Here I am again.
[LAUGHTER]
Can wake up in gratitude
for your intelligence,
your good health.
These are all things that
are given to you by grace.
You don't get any credit for
living in the United States
instead of living in
Bosnia or South Africa.
There are all sorts
to dreadful places
you could live where you're
starving and malnourished,
tortured, hunted
down by the police.
You're none of those things.
You live in New York.
Enjoy the benefits of
peace and democracy.
And--
[LAUGHTER]
Does WNYC still
say that every day?
8 million people live together
in peace and harmony enjoying
the benefits of democracy.
I remember it well.
Anyway, you have a
multitude of things
to be grateful for,
particularly your good health
and your intelligence
and where you live.
And you have this interesting
opportunity to open your eyes
and say, thank you, God.
Or thank you, universe.
Or give thanks to the organizing
principles of the universe that
led you here.
And just an interesting
choice you can make.
What's the very first thing
you do when you open your eyes
and you have an opportunity
to open your eyes
and reside in gratitude?
And the really
surprising thing is
that that can change the
whole direction your day goes.
Physicists are always
interested in what's
called boundary conditions.
And you've heard the story
that the butterfly flapping
his wings in India is what
determines whether or not
the next northeaster
comes through New York
or stops in Boston.
The smallest thing at
the edge of the periphery
changes what the outcome is.
If you can open
your eyes-- and this
is very easy to do experiment.
Doesn't cost a thing.
You don't even have
to write it up.
What you discover is that
if you open your eyes
in thanksgiving
instead of in fear,
it will change your entire day.
You don't have to do
a single other thing.
It is one of the free
gifts that's available.
So that if you can
wake up in gratitude,
go through your day surrendering
your judgments, which
is even-- that's really tough.
But it's worth pursuing.
And also finding a way to
surrender your attachments
to your cherished outcomes.
You continue to
teach your classes
or do whatever you
do for a living.
I'm not saying you
should drop out.
But if you can do that
in a surrendered way
so that you're
flowing in your work
and doing your work in love
rather than feeling that you're
a failure if you don't
accomplish this, that,
and the other thing,
you have an opportunity
to reside in a much
more peaceful state
than if you're considering
that each thing you
do each step of the way is
a live or die consideration.
So what I'm proposing is that
the first step towards stepping
in the stream of a
peaceful existence
is to give up this judgment
and attachment to the outcome
and awaken in a thankful state.
A second step that's critical
is to find some kind of practice
to quiet the ongoing chatter.
Some kind of
meditative practice.
And there are a multitude
of meditation and prayer
and other things you can
do to stop the chatter.
It's critical that you don't
let-- basically that there
are resentments that you have.
And you give people
an opportunity
to run around in your
mind and live there
with no rent being charged.
You're giving people free rent
to run around and make noise
in your mind.
And it's critical
to find a way get
rid of that resentment
and quiet your mind
through some kind of practice.
So the first step is a
way of living your life.
This is a general
self-improvement model
which is the first step to
take charge of your activity.
The second step is to
take charge of your mind.
To find a way to stop the
ongoing chatter so even when
you're sitting on the
subway, riding the subway
can be a meditation.
I'm sure some of you know that.
For others it may
seem very far fetched.
But what you discover
as you develop
some kind of meditation
practice that you're
no longer ever bored.
You go to the doctor
and he said you're
going to have to sit
there for 45 minutes.
Just sit in that chair.
You say, what a
wonderful opportunity.
I can just sit and meditate
and be in bliss for 45 minutes
and there's not any other
damn thing I should be doing.
I'm doing exactly
the right thing.
Somebody's given me
a gift of 45 minutes.
You can have that
experience if you're sitting
at a red light on Broadway.
You can pound your
steering wheel waiting
for the damn light to
change or you can say,
I've just been given
two minutes of free time
and there's nothing I
should be doing other
than sitting here in love.
It's a gift.
And the interesting
thing is nothing changes.
You just get to
choose what you're
going to do with your mind.
Now the third thing
along the path
to finding a way
to residing in love
is that you have to
really want to do it.
It has to surface as the most
important thing in your life.
Because there will always
be something else to do.
So you have to make a
commitment that finding a way
to reside in this peaceful
state is an important part
of your activity.
And finally, an important, and
for me critical, thing to do
is to find a teacher who can
propel you into this state,
into this condition.
And that's harder to do.
I've been very blessed
in that I found
a teacher who is an American
mystic woman named Gangaji.
She was an acupuncturist.
She went to India and became
the American lineage bearer
for Ramana Maharshi that
Ram Dass was talking about.
And what a spiritual teacher
can do for you is at one level,
she will talk to you
and answer questions,
much as I have done today.
And for most of the
people in her audience,
they say this is a very
attractive, intelligent woman
who really
understands the dharma
and has explained a variety
of helpful things to know.
There are another
group of people
who have fallen off their chairs
and are residing in a loving,
blissful state because a
powerful transmitting teacher
such as Gangaji or Jesus
or Buddha or Ramakrishna
or for other powerful
teachers can allow
you to resonate with them.
An awakened teacher
resides in a loving state,
in what Ram Dass was
describing as his state two.
They reside at the
steady in love.
And if you have a
unguarded, quiet moment,
you can resonate
with that teacher
and find yourself
in love with them.
It is because Gangaji is an
attractive woman-- frequently
some man will stand up and
say, you've changed my life.
I don't know what to do.
I'm in love with you.
And she'll say,
well, good for you.
I'm in love all the time.
How nice for you that
you have found a way
to reside in love as well.
Remember that experience.
And people who have had the
experience of residing in love,
whether through meditation,
prayer, drugs, quieting
their mind, is a
life-changing experience
that they can carry with them
throughout their entire lives.
No charge.
You don't have to
believe a thing.
It's something to do rather
than something to believe.
And the rewarding part of
that is that what you discover
is that you have within
yourself the love
that you're looking for.
Thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]